# Lab_8_sequence_comparison

This lab has **two parts**. 
**Part 1** The first part you will analyze the PGM sequences generated by everyone in the class last week. 
**Part 2** You will find a gene involved in the pathway of your choice

&ensp;

# Outline
[PART 1](#part-1)

[Step 1 - Setup Folders](#step-1---setup-your-lab-7-folder)

[Step 2 - Copy files](#step-2---copy-the-rad53-sequences-into-your-lab-7-folder)

[Step 3 - Align Sequences](#step-3---align-the-rad53-sequences-using-muscle)

[Step 4 - Consensus Sequence](#step-4---create-a-consensus-sequence)

[LQ 1](#lq-1)

[LQ 2](#lq-2)

[LQ 3](#lq-3)

[Step 5 - Compare to consensus](#step-5---compare-your-sequence-to-the-consensus)

[LQ 4](#lq-4)

[PART 2](#part-2)

[Step 1 - File setup](#step-1---copy-your-gene-of-interest-file)

[Step 2 - Align sequences](#step-2---align-your-reference-sequences)

[Step 3 - Build HMM](#step-3---build-your-hmm)

[Step 4 - Search with HMM](#step-4---search-your-genome-annotation-with-hmmsearch)

[Step 5 - Examine HMM search results](#step-5---look-at-your-hmm-output)

[LQ 5](#lq-5)

[LQ 6](#lq-6)

[Step 6 - Learn about your gene](#step-6---Learn-about-your-gene)

[LQ 7](#lq-7)

[LQ 8](#lq-8)

[LQ 9](#lq-9)

[LQ 10](#lq-10)

&ensp;
# PART 1
&ensp;
## Step 1 - Setup your lab 7 folder

As usual, you will need to set up your new folder for lab 7. 
Make a directory called "lab_8"

&ensp;
&ensp;

## Step 2 - Copy the rad53 sequences into your lab 7 folder

The sequences for lab are in a file called "all_rad53.fasta".

Move into your lab 7 folder and copy ```/projects/class/binf3101_001/all_rad53.fasta``` into your lab 7 folder

You will also need to copy in your rad53 file from lab_6. 

At this point, you should have the following files in your lab_8 folder:
- all_rad53.fasta
- SRRXXXXX.rad53.fasta

**Check your SRRXXXX.rad53.fasta file** if it is empty, you will need to go back to lab #6 and extract it. Ask for help if you need it. 

&ensp;

## Step 3 - Align the rad53 sequences using MUSCLE
&ensp;
### Step 3a - load MAFFT 
Muscle is already installed on the cluster. To load it you can use

```bash
module load mafft
```
&ensp;

### Step 3b - Align the whole class's rad53 sequences

You will use MAFFT to align the sequences in the file ```all_rad53.fasta``` and save it to a new file called ```all_rad53.align.fasta```

To learn how to use MAFFT you can use the help documentation. 

To access the help documentation for MAFFT type

```bash
mafft --help
```

Use the information in the help documentation to run mafft to align the sequences and save them in a new file called ```all_rad53.align.fasta```. 

Once you generate the protein alignment, you can take a look at it using the ```cat``` command 

&ensp;
&ensp;

## Step 4 - Create a consensus sequence

A consensus sequence looks at the alignment and reports the most common amino acid (or base pair) at that position. 

For example, if we had the alignment below

PLANK
PRANK
CRANK
PLANS

We could generate a consensus sequence that reports the consensus amino acid at a threshold of >50%
This would be:

PxANK

There is no consensus (x) for that second position because no amino acid reaches >50%

To generate our consensus sequence, we are going to use the EMBOSS program **cons**

&ensp;

### Step 4a - Load emboss

To load emboss we will use

```ml emboss```

### Step 4b - Generate consensus Sequence

To generate the consensus sequence for all the rad53 files (all_rad53.align.fasta) we want to use the format 

```cons inputfile outputfile```

Fill in the input and output files to generate the consensus sequence. 

&ensp;

### Step 4c - Look at the consensus sequence

Take a look at the consensus sequence we generated and answer the questions below. 

Note - Some of the letters may be upper-case and some may be lower-case.

UPPERCASE letters = **high conservation** wherease 
lowercase letters = **low conservation**

&ensp;
&ensp;

# LQ 1

How many positions in the sequence alignment did not have a consensus amino acid?

&ensp;
&ensp;

# LQ 2

How many positions in the sequence alignment had low conservation for Lysine (which is abbreviated K)?

**_TIP_** In this case when we use grep we **do not use the -c command**. This is because it only counts **lines**.
If we want to match just one character (for example, z) we would use grep with the ```-o``` option. For example, the command would be
```bash 
grep -o "z" file.txt
z
z
z
z
```

That will print out every time there is a "z" in the file. 

If you don't want to count the number of times that is printed out, we can add " | wc -l" to the end of our command. This calls the **w**ord **c**ount command and the ```-l``` option says to count the lines

```bash
grep -o "z" file.txt | wc -l
4
```

&ensp;
&ensp;

# LQ 3

How many positions in the sequence alignment had high conservation for Lysine (which is abbreviated K)?

&ensp;
&ensp;

## Step 5 - Compare your sequence to the consensus

To compare your rad53 sequence (generated in lab 6) to the consensus sequence, we are going to use **blastp**

To load blast use ```module load blast/2.11.0+```

In this case, each file is on 1 sequence - so it doesn't matter which file we put as the query and which we put as the sequence. 

Save the blastp output to a new file so you can look at it and answer the questions below

&ensp;
&ensp;

# LQ 4 
Report the following statistic for your rad53 vs the consensus
1. Score (bits)
2. E-value
3. Percent Identities
4. Percent Gaps

&ensp;
&ensp;

# PART 2
In this part, you will identify a metabolic gene of your choosing. 

Head to this link to see which genes are available to you https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Ku1xStej_DAnVDvz2bLT3plVjDAlw0-b0WGsSyOqg9I/edit?usp=sharing

You can choose any gene with YES in the column.

&ensp;
&ensp;

## Step 1 - Copy your gene of interest file

I have found reference sequences (aka known sequences) for each of the genes. They are in files called ```gene.fasta``` in the shared class space. 

Now you will need to copy that file into your current lab_8 directory

```bash
cp /projects/class/binf3101_001/lab_8_ref_seqs/yourprot.fasta .
```

You will also need to copy over your protein annotations from last lab. So if you are still in the lab 7 folder you can use the following command.

```bash
cp ../lab_6/SRRXXXXX.prot.fasta .
```

Now you should also have those two files in your directory.

&ensp;
&ensp;

## HMM SEARCH 

Instead of using blast, this time we are going to use **hmmer**. The major steps of doing a hmmer search are

1) Align reference sequences
2) Build an hmm from the reference sequence alignment
3) Search your sequences using the hmm

## Step 2 - Align your reference sequences

We are going to use MAFFT again to align the sequences

Mafft has an even easier command-line application 

```bash
module load mafft

mafft input > output
```

In this case, your input file will be your reference sequences. The outout will be a new file called someting line ```gene.align.fasta```

Take a look at your alignment using the ```cat``` command.

&ensp;
&ensp;

## Step 3 - Build your HMM

To build your HMM it's very easy! 
```bash
#load hmmer
module load hmmer

#run hmmbuild - replace gene with your gene of interest
hmmbuild gene.hmm gene.align.fasta
```
Take a look at your new Hidden Markov Model profile file using head

&ensp;
&ensp;

## Step 4 - Search your genome annotation with hmmsearch 

If you look in the hmmsearch help ```hmmsearch -h``` you'll see that the usage is in the format below:
```bash
hmmsearch -h

Usage: hmmsearch [options] <hmmfile> <seqdb>
```

We are going to use two options:

```-E 1e-10``` - that sets the cutoff to a very small number! So we only get good matches
```-o output.txt``` - this will send the output to the file output.txt

Our hmm file <hmmfile> is the one you created above in the format ```gene.hmm```

The "seqdb " is just our SRRXXXXX.prot.fasta file. 

Put all those pieces together and run the command! 

&ensp;
&ensp;

## Step 5 - look at your hmm output

Open up your hmmer output file and answer the questions below

&ensp;
&ensp;

# LQ 5 
How many complete sequences passed the E-value cutoff?

&ensp;

# LQ 6 
What sequence (or sequences) have the most significant E-value? There may be more than one if there is a tie. 

&ensp;
&ensp;

## Step 6 - Learn about your gene

Use the SGD https://www.yeastgenome.org/ to look up the gene you chose to analyze (not rad53). Once you find the gene on the database answer the questions below

# LQ 7
What gene did you choose to study?

# LQ 8
In the Gene Ontology section, what Biological Process is your gene involved in? 

# LQ 9 
In the Protein section, what is one domain found within your protein?

# LQ 10
In the Homology section, what is one other Species that has a homolog of this gene?






